---
title: 'Using NLP for Materials Science'
date: 2020-09-10
permalink: /posts/2020/09/NLP_Mat_sci/
tags:
  - NLP
  - Materials Science
  - Text-mining
  - Maching Learning
---
At first thought the idea of using natural language processing to discover new materials is counterintuitive. We think of machine learning as a process that takes in data and learns from important features to make predictions. If those input data are natural language, and the predictions are new materials, then it feels like something very crazy has to happen in-between.

This topic is the subject of my entire PhD, namely answering the question <i>"Can we use NLP, data-science and machine learning to discover new materials?"</i>. With this blog post I will a) explain why we should try, and b) show that we can.

## Materials Discovery

Materials are vital in almost every aspect of everday life. From the small, such ascomputer chips and household appliances to the large, such as buildings and aircraft. All these applications contain countless materials that have been extensively tested and optimized for both cost and performance.  

As the demands of consumers or manufacturing processes change, it is necessary to find new materials that exhibit novel behaviours. This is ultimately the role of materials science research, which aims to synthesise, characterise and optimize new materials.

Traditionally, the process of going from a basic chemical compound to its application in a device is extremely slow. It requires extensive trial-and-error and scientific intuition, this is expensive and very inefficient.  

## Machine Learning for Materials

Instead, what if we could predict the properties of materials <b>before</b> we make them? That way, we could save the expensive computational and experimental testing only for those candidates that are most promising.

This is not a new idea. Scientists have long been considering ways of predicting material properties using basic descriptors. For instance, given a list of chemical elements that make up a compound (think $H$ and $O$ in $H_2O$), is it possible to predict the properties of the bulk compound based on the properties of the elements?

It turns out that you can, but only in a limited way. The chemical feature-space consists of all possible elements, in all possible structural configurations, this space is far too large for us to build a suitable predictive model.

This is where machine learning comes in. We know that machine learning algorithms are highly suited to analysing large high-dimensional datasets that are otherwise intractable for humans. So surely, if enough data exist, we could throw all materials data into a complex machine learning algorithm that would spit out new materials whose properties should lend them to specific applications.

Of course, the reality is not that simple. It is estimated that the possible chemical space should be around $10^{100}$, but there are only $10^5$ known materials currently. Therefore our problem is hugely underdefined, and with such a large feature space, its likely that models will overfit, or suffer from the curse of dimensionality.  

Despite there being several thousand known materials, the biggest limitation for machine learning algorithms in materials science is the lack of annotated datasets on materials and their properties. We know that supervised learning uses labelled data to make predictions, and neural networks require tens of thousands of samples in order to learn high-quality models. So what we need are databases of high-quality experimental data, describing materials, their structures and their properties.

## The Scientific Literature

The vast majority of existing data on materials are locked away in the journal articles, reviews and theses published in the scientific literature. For hundreds of years, scientists have been publishing experimental results, and around 2.5 million new articles are published annually, and this is growing. Clearly, it is not possible for a materials scientist to read all of the relevant articles, compile all the data and then design a new material. By the time you had compiled enough data for a model to be meaningful, the research would have moved on and you'd have another million articles to analyse.

We need a method for automatically compiling materials data in structured databases from the scientific literature. This way, large databases of high-quality materials data could be used to feed machine learning algorithms that predict properties and new materials. Thereby reducing the "molecule-to-market" timeframe from years to months (or even weeks).

This is where we need natural language processing, in order to anaylse scientific documents, extract relevant compounds and identify their properties. However, scientific text is complicated, so how do we create a general pipeline for chemical information extraction?

## Documents
Scientific documents are semi-structured. 

## Named Entities

## Relationship Extraction

## Interdependency Resolution

